SPC AC 141958

   Day 1 Convective Outlook  
   NWS Storm Prediction Center Norman OK
   0258 PM CDT Fri Mar 14 2025

   Valid 142000Z - 151200Z

   ...THERE IS A MODERATE RISK OF SEVERE THUNDERSTORMS THE LOWER/MID
   MISSISSIPPI VALLEY INTO THE LOWER OHIO VALLEY...

   ...SUMMARY...
   A regional outbreak of severe thunderstorms is likely this afternoon
   through tonight across parts of the Lower/Mid Mississippi Valley and
   portions of the Lower Ohio Valley and Mid-South. Numerous tornadoes,
   several of which could be strong to intense, widespread severe gusts
   ranging from 60 to 100 mph, and scattered large hail up to baseball
   size all appear likely.

   ...20z Update...
   Widespread significant severe weather remains likely this afternoon
   through tonight over much of the MS Valley and parts of the
   Southeast. 

   An intense, negative-tilt upper trough and 120 kt mid-level jet will
   rapidly eject northeastward over the central Plains through the day.
   An associated deep surface low over western KS will continue to
   intensify as it lifts east/northeast tonight. Initial updrafts along
   a bent back dryline from northeastern KS, far eastern OK, and
   western MO will spread northeastward into a warm and rapidly
   moistening air mass over the MO Valley. While initial dewpoints are
   quite limited, (40s F) very steep low and mid-level lapse rates and
   a rapid surge of low-level moisture is likely later this
   afternoon/evening. A broken line of initially high-based storms will
   quickly spread eastward within very strong tropospheric flow.
   Efficient downward momentum transport will support widespread
   damaging gusts, potentially as high as 80-100 mph.

   Ahead of these storms, low-level dewpoints should rapidly surge into
   the 50s and low 60s F. Lowering cloud bases, and very strong mid and
   low-level shear will allow for a few semi-discrete/embedded
   supercells to form/mature over eastern MO, southern IA, western IL
   and northern AR. A tornado threat (some strong to intense), is
   likely to develop with these storms through the late afternoon and
   evening hours, along with a continued risk for damaging winds and
   large hail.

   Farther south over parts of the ArkLaMiss and southwest TN,
   scattered storms are expected to evolve within a strong low-level
   warm air advection regime and ahead of the Pacific front. Dewpoints
   in the mid 60s F will quickly lift northward over northern LA,
   southern AR, into central MS. While forcing for ascent is likely to
   be more nebulous, strong low-level flow within a 45-60 kt low-level
   jet will support significant hodograph enlargement and sufficient
   moisture/buoyancy for strong supercells. Recent CAM guidance has
   come into better agreement on the positioning/timing of a cluster of
   likely supercells evolving across northern LA and west-central MS
   later this evening. Given the intensifying wind fields, and STP
   environment of 3-4, strong tornadoes appear more likely through the
   evening and into the overnight hours. Given increased confidence in
   the development of intense supercells, have adjusted the Moderate
   area farther south and west over MS/LA/AR.

   ..Lyons.. 03/14/2025

   .PREV DISCUSSION... /ISSUED 1130 AM CDT Fri Mar 14 2025/

   ...Synopsis...
   Water-vapor imagery late this morning indicates a powerful and
   negatively tilted mid/upper-level shortwave trough over the southern
   High Plains. An intense mid-level jet (with winds of 100-115+ kt at
   500 mb) will continue to round the base of the trough, and quickly
   eject northeastward across OK and eastern KS this afternoon. This
   mid-level jet will move over parts of the mid MS Valley and Midwest
   this evening and tonight in tandem with the northeastward-advancing
   shortwave trough. Strong ascent aloft associated with both of these
   features will overspread portions of the central CONUS as a deep
   surface cyclone develops northeastward from the central High Plains
   into the Upper Midwest this afternoon through tonight. In the low
   levels, a dryline will surge eastward across the southern/central
   Plains through the day, eventually arcing from the low southeastward
   into the Ozarks. A large area of significant severe potential
   remains evident across parts of the lower/mid MS Valley into the
   Midwest and Mid-South.

   ...Mid Mississippi Valley into the Midwest and Mid-South...
   Ample diurnal heating is expected through this afternoon ahead of
   the cyclone, with elevated convection already occurring across parts
   of eastern OK into southeast KS and southwest MO. More robust,
   surface-based thunderstorms will likely develop by early/mid
   afternoon (18-21z) along/east of the dryline from parts of eastern
   NE southward into eastern KS/western MO, as a southerly low-level
   jet attempts to bring shallow boundary-layer moisture northward into
   the mid MS Valley and vicinity. The northern portion of this
   convection will be oriented more orthogonal to the ejecting
   mid-level jet, and current expectations are for quick upscale growth
   into a fast northeastward-moving band, posing a risk for widespread
   severe/damaging winds as this activity moves into IA and towards the
   MO/IA/IL border region. Given the strength of the low/mid-level flow
   and presence of steep lapse rates aloft, along with a well-mixed
   boundary layer, intense thunderstorm straight-line gusts peaking
   locally in the 80-100 mph range are possible with the stronger
   cores/inflections in the band as it matures and moves across parts
   of the mid MS Valley, and eventually into the southwestern Great
   Lakes this evening through tonight. 

   Additional, potentially more discrete, severe thunderstorms will
   develop this afternoon farther southeast along the wind shift into
   central/eastern MO, generally on the northern periphery of somewhat
   better low-level moisture from southeast MO southward into the
   Mid-South. Stronger high-level flow and ample deep-layer shear over
   these will likely promote at least semi-discrete supercells. Latest
   model guidance, including various convection-allowing HREF members,
   suggest scattered supercells developing late this afternoon and
   evening as far south as the MS/AR/TN border region. Have nudged
   severe probabilities and the corresponding SLGT/ENH/MDT westward a
   little in western/central MO to account for a slightly earlier
   initiation. Various NAM/RAP forecast soundings strongly favor
   intense supercells capable of large to very large hail (up to 2-3
   inches in diameter), and potentially multiple strong to intense
   tornadoes this evening as effective SRH rapidly increases in tandem
   with a southerly low-level jet strengthening to 50-65+ kt. This
   substantial severe threat is expected to continue eastward overnight
   into parts of the lower OH Valley/Midwest, before convection
   eventually outpaces the low-level moisture return and weakens.

   ...Lower Mississippi Valley...
   Large-scale forcing for ascent appears a bit more nebulous/weak
   farther south into the lower MS Valley. Still, the 12Z suite of
   guidance shows some potential for surface-based thunderstorms
   developing by late this afternoon across the ArkLaMiss region. While
   the stronger low/mid-level flow and forcing are expected to remain
   to the north of this region, greater low-level moisture and related
   instability will be present. This favorable thermodynamic and
   kinematic environment will support supercells, with associated
   threat for large to very large hail, damaging winds, and tornadoes.
   Some of tornadoes could be strong this evening with any sustained
   supercells, especially across central MS and vicinity. Have expanded
   the ENH to account for this potential, and consideration was given
   to expanding the MDT southward into central MS as well. But, there
   is still some uncertainty with overall thunderstorm coverage.

   CLICK TO GET WUUS01 PTSDY1 PRODUCT

   NOTE: THE NEXT DAY 1 OUTLOOK IS SCHEDULED BY 0100Z
