ZCZC SPCSWOD48 ALL
   ACUS48 KWNS 110849
   SPC AC 110849

   Day 4-8 Convective Outlook  
   NWS Storm Prediction Center Norman OK
   0349 AM CDT Tue Mar 11 2025

   Valid 141200Z - 191200Z

   ...DISCUSSION...
   ...Days 4-6/Fri-Sun - Mid/Lower MS Valley to the Southeast and
   Mid-Atlantic...

   An intense spring storm system will deliver a multi-day severe
   weather episode to portions of the central and eastern U.S.
   beginning Friday and continuing through the weekend. All severe
   thunderstorm hazards are expected, including widespread damaging
   winds, tornadoes (some strong), and large hail.

   On Friday, an anomalously intense upper cyclone is forecast to
   deepen as it tracks northeast across the southern/central Plains to
   the Upper Midwest. An intense jet streak (greater than 100 kt at 500
   mb) will overspread the Ozarks and Mid-MS Valley during the
   afternoon into the overnight hours. Likewise, a low-level jet will
   intensify Friday night to 65+ kt. As intense surface cyclogenesis
   occurs, southerly low-level flow will transport modest moisture as
   far north as eastern IA, southeast MN and southern WI. Deeper
   boundary-layer moisture will remain focused southward from the
   Mid-South toward the Lower MS Valley/central Gulf coast.
   Nevertheless, strongly forced convection within intense deep-layer
   flow will pose a widespread risk for severe (potentially significant
   severe) thunderstorm winds and tornadoes from late afternoon into
   the overnight hours across a large area centered on the Mid/Lower MS
   Valley vicinity.

   On Saturday, the upper cyclone over the Upper Midwest will lift
   northeast into Ontario, but a larger-scale upper trough will remain
   over the Plains. The Plains trough will intensify and spread east
   toward the MS/OH Valleys. This will maintain the eastward
   progression of a strongly forced line of convection from the Ohio
   Valley south/southwest into the Deep South/central Gulf coast
   vicinity through Saturday night. Portions of the Deep South into GA
   may see multiple rounds of severe convection with a mix of both
   supercell and QLCS storm modes potentially moving across the region,
   posing a concern for damaging tornadoes and swaths of severe winds.

   On Sunday, the system will continue to shift east, with a moist
   airmass and strong deep-layer flow continuing to support a line of
   convection producing damaging winds into the Carolinas and
   Mid-Atlantic vicinity.

   Outlook areas will continue to be refined over the coming days as
   key features become better resolved.

   ..Leitman.. 03/11/2025

   CLICK TO GET WUUS48 PTSD48 PRODUCT
