SPC AC 151228

   Day 1 Convective Outlook  
   NWS Storm Prediction Center Norman OK
   0628 AM CST Mon Jan 15 2024

   Valid 151300Z - 161200Z

   ...NO SEVERE THUNDERSTORM AREAS FORECAST...

   ...SUMMARY...
   Organized severe thunderstorms are not forecast through tonight.

   ...Synopsis/Discussion...
   In mid/upper levels, broadly cyclonic flow will continue to cover
   most of the CONUS, anchored by a large cyclone over the southern
   Hudson Bay region.  A series of shortwaves will pass through this
   flow -- predominantly across the central/northern Plains, mid/upper
   Mississippi Valley, and Upper Great Lakes.  Farther south, a broad
   fetch of west-southwesterly flow aloft will persist across the Gulf
   and FL, with an embedded, weak shortwave trough initially evident in
   moisture-channel imagery over the west-central Gulf.  This
   perturbation is expected to cross the FL Peninsula around 00Z. 
   Meanwhile, a warm front -- analyzed at 11Z from near Cape Canaveral
   across coastal south FL then west-northwestward to a frontal-wave
   low over the northwestern Gulf -- will shift/redevelop northward up
   the peninsula through midday, stalling across central FL this
   afternoon.

   Though near-surface flow will be modest on both sides of the front,
   enough lift should occur in the frontal zone, with diurnal heating
   on the warm side and weak midlevel lift preceding the Gulf shortwave
   trough, to support scattered showers and isolated to widely
   scattered thunderstorms today into this evening.  Rich warm-sector
   moisture -- with surface dewpoints commonly upper 60s to low 70s F
   -- will offset modest midlevel lapse rates enough for around 1000-
   1500 J/kg MLCAPE south of the front.  Elevated MUCAPE of 500-1000
   J/kg is possible within about 50-75 nm north of the boundary.  Weak
   low-level flow (in the absence of stronger large-scale forcing) will
   keep hodographs rather small, but amidst effective-shear vectors
   commonly in the 35-45-kt range.  As such, one or two of the cells in
   the precip area may exhibit supercell characteristics briefly. 
   However, weakness of both lapse rates and low-level shear preclude
   enough severe potential for an unconditional outlook at this time.

   ..Edwards/Dean.. 01/15/2024

   CLICK TO GET WUUS01 PTSDY1 PRODUCT

   NOTE: THE NEXT DAY 1 OUTLOOK IS SCHEDULED BY 1630Z
