SPC AC 151634

   Day 1 Convective Outlook  
   NWS Storm Prediction Center Norman OK
   1134 AM CDT Sat Mar 15 2025

   Valid 151630Z - 161200Z

   ...THERE IS A HIGH RISK OF SEVERE THUNDERSTORMS ACROSS PARTS OF
   MISSISSIPPI AND ALABAMA...

   ...SUMMARY...
   A tornado outbreak is expected today across the central Gulf Coast
   States and Deep South into the Tennessee Valley. Numerous
   significant tornadoes, some of which should be long-track and
   potentially violent, are expected this afternoon and evening. The
   most dangerous tornado threat will begin across eastern Louisiana
   and Mississippi through this afternoon, spread across Alabama this
   afternoon into the evening, and reach western parts of the Florida
   Panhandle and Georgia tonight.

   ...Southeast into the Tennessee Valley...
   No changes have been made to the High Risk area across the
   Southeast. Multiple supercells are ongoing late this morning across
   southeast LA into MS, along and east of a convectively reinforced
   baroclinic zone. A very favorable parameter space exists across the
   Southeast for severe thunderstorms, which will likely help maintain
   ongoing supercells and small line segments. Current expectations are
   for the most favorable strong to intense tornado environment to
   continue across MS this afternoon and evening, with moderate
   instability and ample low-level and deep-layer shear already in
   place. The tornado threat will spread eastward into AL and southern
   TN this afternoon and evening, and eventually into parts of the FL
   Panhandle, western/central GA, and eastern TN overnight in tandem
   with an ejecting southern-stream shortwave trough and related
   intense low-level jet. Both large hail and severe/damaging winds
   will also be a threat with these supercells. Upscale growth into one
   or more bowing line segments will be possible, especially with
   northward extent into the TN Valley and eastward into GA, where
   potentially numerous to widespread severe/damaging winds may occur.
   Reference Mesoscale Discussions 199, 200, and 201 for more
   information on the near-term severe threat across the Southeast.

   ...Southern Appalachians...
   As an upper trough pivots east into the region late tonight, strong
   low-level warm/moist advection will contribute to a gradually
   destabilizing airmass. Despite weaker buoyancy with eastward extent
   over northeast GA into the western Carolinas, very intense low to
   mid-level flow will aid in maintaining a risk for a few supercells
   and line segments into a more limited thermodynamic environment.
   This will potentially yield a risk for damaging gusts and an
   isolated tornado threat through early Sunday morning.

   ...Ohio Valley into Southern Great Lakes...
   Guidance maintains a belt of strong 850 mb flow through midday,
   before an intensification of the northern periphery of a low-level
   jet extending from the central Gulf Coast into the Mid South
   overspreads the region. Uncertainty remains regarding the magnitude
   of destabilization behind earlier convective activity, and its
   resultant effects on severe potential. Most guidance generally shows
   only weak buoyancy (at or below 500 J/kg of MUCAPE), but some
   airmass recovery in the wake of earlier thunderstorms may occur over
   IN into OH and vicinity.

   ..Gleason/Squitieri.. 03/15/2025

   CLICK TO GET WUUS01 PTSDY1 PRODUCT

   NOTE: THE NEXT DAY 1 OUTLOOK IS SCHEDULED BY 2000Z
